From _From What?  Toward What?_  Toward __What?__: A Rhapsody
============================================================
:Author: brian m. carlson

== On Keats and Pirsig ==

Robert M. Pirsig once wrote a book entitled _Zen and the Art of Motorcycle
Maintenance_.  In this book, he explored a number of concepts, including
romantic thought and classical thought.  He viewed these concepts—that we
normally think of as a dichotomy—as a unity, which he called Quality.

Numerous years earlier, John Keats wrote

______
[verse]
.....
Beauty is truth, truth beauty,—that is all	 
	Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.
.....
_____

Keats, I think, got the same thing that Pirsig did: that both romantic thought
and classical thought are tightly intertwined, so tightly that they cannot be
separated.

I often find that when I am programming, I am at peace, in some way.  Thus, my
classical activity begets a purely romantic one: a feeling of calmness and
stillness, a quiescence.  Similarly, when I am at peace, I often philosophize:
my romantic activity begets what Pirsig describes as the highest level of
classical thought.

== A Gift ==

I find that what I hate most about writing is explaining.  I suppose this
explains why I prefer writing poetry.  I need not explain, only present an idea,
a gift of thought, and be done.

Since it is a gift, I need not be concerned with what my recipient makes with
it.  If I get a friend a blender, thinking he will make smoothies, and in fact
he makes margaritas, he has made good use of my gift, in a way that suits him.
If I write a poem, trying to express one idea, but a reader gets another, then
he has in fact made good use of my gift.  He has thought, felt, considered,
expressed, wondered about something, _anything_, and is richer for it.

== True Insight ==

I have Bipolar II disorder.  One of the huge questions in any bipolar person’s
life is whether or not to take medication.  This is true for me as well.  In my
case, the questions relate to essence:  Can I discover who I am without the
ability to focus?  Will the medication change who I am?  Will I lose something
of myself?  Will it make me something I’m not?  Will it cheat me of who I am?
Can I really gain true insight when I’m moody or angry?

== A Forest of Chips ==

When I go to a restaurant, I will often have a sandwich with chips.  One of the
first things I do after placing my napkin on my lap, is to open the bag of
chips and dump them out on the plate.  In this way, I can see what I have: I can
plan ahead.  I won’t eat half the chips but only a quarter of the sandwich;
likewise, I won’t eat all of the sandwich but only some of the chips.  They go
together: they should be in proportion.

// vim: set filetype=asciidoc:
