Two's Company

Andrew Sullivan's Three's a Crowd attempts to dispel claims that same-sex
marriage[0] will lead to polygamy.  His first two paragraphs provide mostly
background and are therefore sufficient for his argument.  However, his thesis
is poorly stated; there is no explicit statement of his argument.  Also, the
unstated thesis does not become clear until the third paragraph, far too late
for a reader to decide whether to continue reading.

[0] The term "same-sex marriage" is used in this analysis, as it is more
accurate, especially with regard to bisexuals.

Sullivan's statement that "here's an attempt at a principled ground" is weak.
Obviously, any argument is an attempt, so Sullivan need not use such indecisive
language, as it only weakens his argument.

In the phrase "both are diversions from the healthy heterosexual norm",
Sullivan's attempt to find a neutral word is obvious and strained.  I
agree with his implicit premise that the word "deviation", regardless of its
neutral sociological tone, would be inappropriate due to its connotations.
However, the word "diversion" seems awkward; perhaps "departure" might be more
appropriate.

Sullivan's use of the word "abandon" in "return the republic to polygamous
abandon" is highly emotional and potentially inflammatory.  The connotation is one of recklessness
and chaos, as well as wanton neglect for the needs and rights of others.  This appeal to emotion wins
him nothing, and has the potential to alienate a portion, albeit small, of his
audience.  Similarly, Sullivan's assertion that "few...have anything but
disdain" for polygamy is not backed up with any sort of facts.  If he is to
convince his audience of this, then he must provide more than simply his
assertion.

Sullivan does, however, argue well against the slippery slope in the fifth
paragraph.  Most people are unaware that the slippery slope is a fallacy, but
Sullivan handles this argument with grace.  Furthermore, his final assertion,
that "[e]ach change should be judged on its own terms", is likely to win him the
support of other historically oppressed peoples, as this assertion is very
similar to Martin Luther King's "they will be judged on the content of their
character".

Sullivan also does an excellent job attacking the assertion that same-sex
marriages would be inappropriate.  First, he states that even if we assume that
men are naturally more promiscuous, that gives even more incentive to allow
same-sex marriages of women, who therefore would be more likely to be
monogamous.  He then attacks the other side, by arguing that if the purpose of
marriage is to encourage monogamy, then gay men would logically be completely
suitable for marriage.

While this would normally smack of an if-by-whiskey argument, where one tries to
argue both sides, Sullivan is not actually arguing both sides, merely pointing
out inconsistencies between two common arguments used by his opposition.

However, Sullivan unfortunately falls victim to an ad hominem attack of the tu
quoque variety.  He constructs a scenario where people who have violated the
conservative ideals of marriage should be denied marriage; these conservative
ideals are of course those of the people encouraging the Defense of Marriage
Act.  Sullivan then explains that if this scenario were to come to fruition that
the three main sponsors of the bill would be disallowed the right to marry.

However, this argument is merely a fallacy in disguise.  His scenario is not an
analogy, but a straw man, since it is wildly unrealistic; and he uses it to
attack his opponents, who admittedly are hypocritical, instead of their
argument.  Although sensational, this line of reasoning is poorly argued.

Throughout the essay, Sullivan maintains a civil, even friendly, tone.
Unfortunately, in the last section, his tone becomes slightly less civil and
slightly more angry; it is clear that Sullivan is bitter about what he views as
a denial of basic human rights.  His personal investment seems to appear here,
and not for the better.

In his conclusion, Sullivan argues well until the end.  There, in the last
sentence, he uses the emotionally-loaded word "bogeyman" to describe adultery,
and insults a significant portion of his audience.  Infidelity in marriage is
quite common these days, judging by the constant media portrayals.
